Received: (qmail 21141 invoked from network); 7 Jan 2003 08:09:10 -0000
Received: from dev212.mailshell.com (HELO mailshell.com) (71.129.195.163)
  by dev50.mailshell.com with SMTP; 7 Jan 2003 08:09:10 -0000
Received: (qmail 21188 invoked by uid 99); 7 Jan 2003 08:09:09 -0000
Received: (qmail 788 invoked from network); 7 Jan 2003 08:08:13 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO list.adventive.com) (64.35.154.130)
  by www.mailshell.com with SMTP; 7 Jan 2003 08:08:13 -0000
Received: from spudmonk (e-64-35-154-130.empnet.net) by list.adventive.com (LSMTP for Windows NT v1.1b) with SMTP id <0.012EA395@list.adventive.com>; Tue, 7 Jan 2003 0:00:46 -0800
Received: from LIST.ADVENTIVE.COM by LIST.ADVENTIVE.COM (LISTSERV-TCP/IP
          release 1.8d) with spool id 3308127 for I-PR@LIST.ADVENTIVE.COM; Tue,
          7 Jan 2003 00:00:45 -0800
Approved-By: editor@ADVENTIVE.COM
Received: from stargate.audettemedia (bc184249.bendcable.com) by
          list.adventive.com (LSMTP for Windows NT v1.1b) with SMTP id
          <3.00228672@list.adventive.com>; Mon, 6 Jan 2003 11:33:30 -0800
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
X-Unsubscribe: i-pr-signoff-request@list.adventive.com
Message-ID:  <I-PR%2003010700004536@LIST.ADVENTIVE.COM>
Date:         Tue, 7 Jan 2003 00:00:45 -0800
Reply-To: ipr@ADVENTIVE.COM
Sender: The I-PR Discussion List <I-PR@LIST.ADVENTIVE.COM>
From: I-PR <editor@ADVENTIVE.COM>
Subject:      I-PR Digest, Issue 362: Local PR
To: "Mailshell User" <nospam@mailshell.com>

-------------------------------------------------------------------
                     I-PR Discussion List
        "News and Discussion of Internet Public Relations"

              This issue is brought to you by Adventive
                      Host Your List With us
                    http://www.adventive.com

-------------------------------------------------------------------
Moderator:                                         Published by:
Nina Shariff                                         Adventive
nina@adventive.com                              www.adventive.com
-------------------------------------------------------------------
January 7, 2003                                      Digest #362
-------------------------------------------------------------------
SEND POSTS: mailto:ipr@adventive.com
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Refer a friend: http://www.adventive.com/tellafriend.html
-------------------------------------------------------------------

                 .....IN THIS DIGEST.....

// -- MODERATOR COMMENT -- //

        "Welcome Back"
                ~ Nina Shariff

// -- FEATURED POST -- //

        "To Get Free Publicity In The Media, Remember That
        All News, Like All Politics, Is Local"
                ~ George McKenzie

// -- NEW DISCUSSION -- //

        "Local Interest PR"
                ~ Shari Thurow

// -- CONTINUING DISCUSSION -- //

        "Working With Ad Agencies"
                ~ Miki Dzugan
                ~ Rob Frankel

        "Emotional Web Site Example"
                ~ Linda Quinet

        "PR Success Stories"
                ~ Marcia Yudkin

-------------------------------------------------------------------


// -- MODERATOR COMMENT -- //

Welcome back, everyone. I hope you all had a great holiday.

Last month, I promised I'd share some of conference highlights from
the Web Content Management Conference here in Chicago. The copy is
currently being edited for the next issue of Web Content Report.
When that's done, I'll share some of the articles.

Until then, it looks like we have some good discussions going that
carried over from last month.

Nina


========= Sponsor Message ==========

                   **** Host Your List With Adventive! ****

Adventive is now offering its hosting technology to qualified
customers. Put your list on the map with high-powered LISTSERV
technology, superior uptime, and total control of your customer
lists.

                    List promotion packages also available.
                Apply today:  mailto:hosting@adventive.com

========= Sponsor Message ==========


// -- FEATURED POST -- //

==> TOPIC: LOCAL PR

From: George McKenzie <george@get-free-publicity.com>

To Get Free Publicity In The Media, Remember That All News, Like All
Politics, Is Local

By George McKenzie

To get a plain text copy of this article, send a blank email to
mailto:george2-13740@sendtheinfo.com

How do you identify newsworthy stories where you work or live?

Especially newsworthy stories about yourself or your company that
you can pitch to the media in the hope of getting some free
publicity.

By remembering a semi-famous quote from the late Speaker Of The
House Of Representatives, Tip O¹Neill.

'All politics is local.'

In a sense, all news is local because even global issues often have
a local impact.

Here are some powerful strategies for spotting opportunities when
they present themselves.

'Piggybacking' simply means putting a fresh or different twist on
something that's already in the news. You might have you seen a
story on the Today Show that reflects something that's happening in
your industry.  Call the station that airs the Today Show and offer
a 'local angle.' They'll probably interview you as part of the story.

You can piggyback on news items, trends, holidays, or community
events - the possibilities never end.

Trends and new ideas and technologies make for good stories. When my
wife and I opened the first South Texas Subway Sandwich Shop inside
a convenience store, we got a front- page write-up in The San
Antonio Business Journal.  It included a color picture of us
standing in front of our location. Buying an equal amount of ad
space would have cost about eight thousand dollars.

If you¹re part of a large company or organization (university,
non-profit, etc) and you¹ve got a lot of people who are qualified to
comment on a wide variety of topics, create and distribute a
directory.  It can be elaborate or simple - as long as your media
contacts can find a suitable expert quickly.  Include names, titles,
and contact numbers (day and evening) and post your list on your web
site.

Polls, surveys, tip sheets, and quizzes make great fillers. Your
data doesn¹t need to scientific or statistically significant, just
interesting.  Unique contests, such as Thrifty Rent-a-Car¹s annual
Honeymoon Disasters Contest, can generate tons of coverage.

The media love controversy and (despite frequent accusations to the
contrary) most go out of their way to present both sides of a story.
If you can offer a contrarian point of view --and you can explain
your case--reporters will often give you an opportunity

You can get the media¹s attention to publicize upcoming events:
classes, open houses, free demonstrations, visits by celebrities.
Publicity before the event helps spark interest and boost attendance.

Human-interest stories are everywhere, including your business.
Think about people in your company, group, or organization.  Does
someone have an intriguing hobby?  Pitch their story to the local
media.

Even the weather and climate can give you a hook for free publicity.
 Homebuilders and remodelers can offer tips about saving energy.
Doctors can suggest tips avoiding colds and flu during the winter.

TV stations and cable channels, radio stations, newspapers,
magazines, trade publications, and newsletters - both print and
electronic - have huge amounts of time and space to fill.

There are more opportunities than ever, and competition is fierce
for advertising dollars, viewers and subscribers. The secret to
success knowing exactly what they¹re looking for - and giving it to
them with a local twist.

Comment: mailto:ipr@adventive.com


// -- NEW DISCUSSION -- //

==> TOPIC: LOCAL INTEREST PR

From: Shari Thurow <shari@grantasticdesigns.com>

Hi all--

First, I would like to wish all I-PR subscribers a pleasant and safe
holiday season.

I have a request for information, if you are able to share success
stories.  I am about to promote my book, entitled Search Engine
Visibility, and I know that generating local interest is a good PR
strategy.  Do any of you have some great success stories you can
share?  Any suggestions, not necessarily in the same field, will be
greatly appreciated.

I hired a PR person who specializes in the Chicago area.  I'm just
wondering if there are other Metro areas that might help.

Thanks so much.

Take care,
Shari Thurow
Webmaster/Marketing Director
http://www.grantasticdesigns.com/tips.html

Comment: mailto:ipr@adventive.com


// -- CONTINUING DISCUSSION -- //

==> TOPIC: WORKING WITH AD AGENCIES

From: Miki Dzugan <mdzugan@markneting.com>

Shari Thurow wrote:

>> I guess I'm trying to find a way to politely say that the ad
agencies have ruined web sites. Press releases are clearly written
for print, not the web.  The site design is not search-engine
friendly at all, necessitating some rather expensive media buys.
Copy is written for brochures, not the web. Sure, the designs are
aesthetically pleasing, but that's about the only benefit I am able
to see. I am having an extremely difficult time convincing potential
clients that their ad agencies do not know what they are doing when
it comes to many aspects of web marketing and web design,
particularly when it comes to the search engines.

Search engine advertising can be expensive, and I can decrease those
costs considerably by redesigning the site for better search engine
visibility and higher conversions. But it's extremely difficult
getting people out of the ad agency mind set.

Have any of you experienced this problem? <<

Shari, we get a lot of business reworking sites done by agencies
when the site owner discovers that their site has no online
visibility at all.

We have recently been implementing agency designed sites. It is a
delicate compromise and the designers do not love us, because we
take their lovely graphics of text and replace it with the ratchety
text that the browsers deliver, etc.

It is extremely frustrating that clients trust agencies with their
site development. Our approach is to market search engine
advertising, and then point out that we can also optimize the site
for better search engine placement. That tactic is working well for
us, but, of course, the client would have a better Web site if they
came to a Web designer rather than an ad agency in the first place.

It's a matter of educating the customers.

Miki Dzugan
MARKnETING.com

Comment: mailto:ipr@adventive.com


==> WORKING WITH AD AGENCIES

From: Rob Frankel <rob@robfrankel.com>

Shari Thurow wrote:

>> Hi all-- I would like to know this group's experiences working
with advertising agencies, and some potential solutions.

Here's my situation. With rare exceptions, I constantly run into
projects where the ad agency has control over the web site design.
As we all know, a print brochure and a web site are two completely
different animals.  Though the print and web pieces should match
somewhat, they should not be identical.

I guess I'm trying to find a way to politely say that the ad
agencies have ruined web sites. <<

SNIPPED

>> Have any of you experienced this problem? <<

You betcha.  And there's only been one solution I've been able to
successfully deploy:

I come from the branding end of things, where the first point of
education is that advertising is not branding.  First you create the
brand (branding) then you raise the awareness of the brand
(advertising/PR).

If you client accepts that, you're home free, because they now
understand that it's NOT the ad agency's job to do anything other
than raise awareness for stuff.  That means they don't do web site
design, the don't do corporate ID.  They don't do ANYTHING, except
raise awareness through the media for the brand and its website, etc.

I have also found that when the client sees how everything the
agency does goes through much faster as a result of this discipline,
the client becomes your ally, and tells the ad agency to stick with
the job for which they've been hired.

Rob Frankel
http://www.RobFrankel.com

Comment: mailto:ipr@adventive.com


==> TOPIC: EMOTIONAL WEB SITE EXAMPLE

From: Linda Quinet <LQuinet@wanadoo.fr>

Quite pertinent for the non-profit site I created for the New York
Metro affiliate for the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill, a
national organization for people suffering from major
neurobiological disorders and the fallout this creates for their
families and loved ones.

Before getting the pictures approved for the home page, one board
member was holding out for less happy pictures. I opted for trying
to making people look as normal as possible (and smiling) so as to
make the information contained more inviting and less threatening.
Mental illness as a subject is unpleasant enough and has so much
stigma associated with it that it's a major obstacle.

We didn't put up test pages with both...no budget or volunteer time
for that. But I always wonder if presenting depressed or troubled
faces would do any better.  I just had to operate on my own gut
instincts.

Linda Quinet

Comment: mailto:ipr@adventive.com


==> TOPIC: PR SUCCESS STORIES

From: Marcia Yudkin <marcia@yudkin.com>

BL Ochman wrote:
>> We decided that trying to promote burglar alarms in a traditional
way was just too boring. Our strategy was to create a "warm, fuzzy"
feeling for the company with "The Baby Sitter's Guide." The booklet
tells parents how to advise babysitters to handle emergencies. It
was offered, free of charge, through print media. News of the offer
ran in papers in 48 states as well as in Good Housekeeping and
Better Homes & Gardens magazines.

More than 18,000 requests were received in three weeks. What company
couldn't use 18,000 sales leads? <<

BL,

I don't understand how someone who wants their babysitter to know
how to handle an emergency would be a good lead for a burglar alarm
company.  It doesn't imply that they live in a dangerous area, it
doesn't indicate anything about whether or not they can afford a
security system and it doesn't even relate to whether or not the
family own their own home.  Someone who lives in a very safe area
(these exist!), who cannot afford a security system and/or who rents
instead of owns would not be in a position to be a customer of the
burglar alarm company.

What am I missing here?

Marcia Yudkin
Author, Six Steps to Free Publicity, Revised Edition

Comment: mailto:ipr@adventive.com

----------------------------------------------------------------

You are subscribed as: nospam@MAILSHELL.COM

List Hosting and Advertising Content
Adventive - The E-Publication Network for Professionals
http://www.adventive.com

Information on how to sponsor this publication
http://www.adventive.com/advertise.html
mailto:adsales@adventive.com

5+ Years of Indexed Searchable Archives
http://list.adventive.com/archives/archives.html

UNSUBSCRIBE:
http://www.adventive.com/removal/i-pr/unsubscribe.html?subscriber=nospam@MAILSHELL.COM

Alternative Link: <a
href=http://www.adventive.com/removal/i-pr/unsubscribe.html?subscriber=nospam@MAILSHELL.COM>
Click Here to Unsubscribe </a>

or to UNSUBSCRIBE VIA EMAIL
mailto:i-pr-signoff-request@list.adventive.com

Alternative Link: <a
href="mailto:i-pr-signoff-request@list.adventive.com">
Unsubscribe Via Email </a>

PROBLEMS WITH UNSUBSCRIBING?

Contact our Postmaster
mailto:postmaster@adventive.com

Alternative Link: <a
href="mailto:postmaster@adventive.com">
Email Postmaster </a>

SUBSCRIBE
Email mailto:i-pr-join-request@list.adventive.com
Web http://www.adventive.com/subscribe.html

© Copyright 1999-2003 Adventive. All Rights Reserved.
-----------------------------------------------------------------
