Received: (qmail 8531 invoked from network); 24 Jan 2003 20:04:27 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO mailshell.com) (71.129.195.163)
  by dev50.mailshell.com with SMTP; 24 Jan 2003 20:04:27 -0000
Received: (qmail 11149 invoked by uid 99); 24 Jan 2003 20:04:28 -0000
Received: (qmail 5092 invoked from network); 24 Jan 2003 20:04:27 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO apollo.business2.com) (64.12.49.184)
  by mail.mailshell.com with SMTP; 24 Jan 2003 20:04:27 -0000
Received: from apollo (apollo [64.12.49.184])
	by apollo.business2.com (8.12.4/8.12.4) with SMTP id h0OJTpdr004444
	for nospam@mailshell.com; Fri, 24 Jan 2003 14:33:49 -0500 (EST)
To: "Mailshell User" <nospam@mailshell.com>
Message-ID: <10434368297060.6035842007966888.BulkMailer@business2.com>
Date: Fri, 24 Jan 2003 14:29:27 -0500 (EST)
From: "Business 2.0 - Working Tech" <newsletters@business2.com>
Subject: Blade Technology Goes Back to the Future
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain;charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *
20th Annual Venture Capital in the Rockies Conference 2/26 ?
2/28/2003, Beaver Creek, CO. Featuring the best from 4 industry
sectors + 4-star resort & skiing. Register now at
www.coloradovca.org
http://ar.atwola.com/redir/B0/q-45VLiP_el9QAE3Q9EjjvJg7GII7YohkwrNXfrEqzgm0aXKjmKmPg$$/http://www.coloradovca.org
* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *

WORKING TECH

Blade Technology Goes Back to the Future
By Yvonne L. Lee

http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46733,00.html

========================
Editor's Note: With this issue, we're relaunching the column
you've long known as The Defogger with a new name and new writer.
From now on, it'll be called Working Tech - a name that we think
describes its subject matter more clearly. Its author, Yvonne
Lee, will focus on the same sort of subjects that Defogger
covered: products and issues in workplace technology. Is that new
server worth the investment? Should you upgrade your software?
How are businesses coping with greater tech needs on stingier
budgets?

Yvonne brings years of experience to her work, having written for
a host of tech bibles, including InfoWorld, Web Techniques, Byte,
HP World, LinuxWorld and PC World.

Let us know what you think.
========================

With big names such as Dell, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, and Sun 
announcing that they're bringing out blade servers, the
architecture has been receiving plenty of attention lately. Blade
technology places a series of computers vertically in an
enclosure called a cage, which is then placed on a rack in the
sever room. This architecture -- wherein computers are stored
vertically rather than horizontally -- packs a heck of a lot more
power than a traditional rack mount. 

Now an Austin-based company has figured out a way to use the
architecture in reverse, for client computers. The company,
ClearCube, is promoting its product as a way to cut down on
maintenance headaches. Under ClearCube's architecture, users'
computers aren't on their desks; they're stacked up in the server
room. The company flogs this innovation as a techie's dream: When
there's a problem, the technicians don't have to waste time
getting to users' work areas to troubleshoot and repair hardware
problems. What ClearCube doesn't publicize is that its
architecture offers more privacy, reduces the risk of abuse, and
is more attractive in situations where neatness and quiet count.

ClearCube is the only company to design a system where the blades
operate as client computers. The company's client blade
architecture uses a paperback-book-size device called a C/Port to
extend a video signal as far as 200 meters (220 yards) from the
computer to the user's monitor across an Ethernet  cable, which
is also used to send the data back and forth. Only the C/Port, a
monitor, a keyboard, a mouse, and approved peripherals are on
each user's desktop.

ClearCube has designed the system so that not only are the
computers tucked out of the way, but computer administrators can
easily restrict access to peripherals. If someone plugs an
unauthorized floppy or CD-ROM drive into the C/Port, it won't
work. This cuts down on copying and pirating and stops the spread
of computer viruses.

So ClearCube melds the security of thin clients -- where users
had a monitor, keyboard, and mouse, but operated applications on
a remote server -- with the flexibility of desktop PCs. One of
the reasons thin clients never quite made it, though, was that
applications had to be redesigned to work on them. With
ClearCube's solution, any PC application will work.

ClearCube's system is catching on. Customers include retailer
Lillian Vernon, Starwood Hotels & Resorts, British Petroleum
North American Gas & Power, Atlanta Business Bank, and the U.S.
Air Force. One enthusiastic client is Scott Hill, a senior
technology officer at the financial management firm Oak
Associates in Akron, Ohio, which switched to ClearCube in 2001.
"Previously it would have taken us 20 minutes to a half an hour
to unplug everything" to deal with trouble, Hill says. "Now it
takes us anywhere from 5 to 10 minutes." He adds that the
ClearCube system prevents certain kinds of abuse. "When you take
the computer off the desk and put it in the server room, people
aren't kicking it, people aren't putting heaters next to them,"
Hill says. "Because it's in our server room, there's less dust
that gets on them because the air is filtered."

Obviously, ClearCube is not without its shortcomings. For
example, since the technology relies on extending video signals
across a longer cable, it doesn't work as well with CRT monitors.
"We've not had as good a response with [the CRTs], because you
need a higher refresh rate," Hill says, explaining that the older
screen technology takes too long to redisplay information. That
means an irritating lag between the time you type something and
the moment it appears on the screen. Also, the same features that
make the solution a good one for applications where you don't
want your data to wander off make it ill suited in situations --
such as news reporting, sales, and marketing -- where you want
the data and applications to travel with the user.  


* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *
20th Annual Venture Capital in the Rockies Conference 2/26 ?
2/28/2003, Beaver Creek, CO. Featuring the best from 4 industry
sectors + 4-star resort & skiing. Register now at
www.coloradovca.org
http://ar.atwola.com/redir/B0/q-45VLiP_el9QAE3Q9EjjvJg7GII7YohkwrNXfrEqzgm0aXKjmKmPg$$/http://www.coloradovca.org
* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Related Articles:

-- A Cube That's Not Square
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,17431,00.html

 
Recommended Links:

-- Dell Computer Corporation (DELL)
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,20892,00.html

-- Hewlett-Packard (HWP)
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,33764,00.html

-- International Business Machines Corporation (IBM)
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,35698,00.html

-- Sun Microsystems, Inc. (SUNW)
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,22013,00.html

-- Ethernet
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,4414,00.html

-- CD-ROM (Compact Disk Read-Only Memory or Media)
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,29231,00.html

 
Today's Top Stories:

-- The Dell Way
http://www.business2.com/articles/mag/0,,46293,00.html

-- Who's Minding the Store?
http://www.business2.com/articles/mag/0,,46334,00.html

-- The Protection Racket
http://www.business2.com/articles/mag/0,,46122,00.html

 
Recent Working Tech Articles:

-- Does Moore's Law Still Hold True?  - Dec 13
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,45941,00.html

-- False Alarms on the Firewall - Nov 15
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,45262,00.html

-- Still Waiting for the Web Services Miracle - Nov 01
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,44928,00.html

-- Read More Working Tech Articles
http://www.business2.com/columns/0,,1485,00.html


++++++++++

Please do not reply to this message.

If you have any questions, comments, or would like to send
feedback to the author, send an e-mail to:
working_tech@business2.com

You are receiving the TEXT version of this newsletter.  To get
the HTML version with links and graphics, just go to:
http://www.business2.com/nl/html?EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com 

To unsubscribe from this newsletter, go to:
http://www.business2.com/newsletter/unsubscribe?id=7&EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com

To manage your existing newsletter subscriptions or subscribe to
other Business 2.0 newsletters, go to:
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/newslettersub/1,,manage,FF.html?EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com

