Received: (qmail 15255 invoked from network); 11 Jan 2003 11:14:27 -0000
Received: from dev210.mailshell.com (HELO mailshell.com) (71.129.195.163)
  by dev50.mailshell.com with SMTP; 11 Jan 2003 11:14:27 -0000
Received: (qmail 11528 invoked by uid 99); 11 Jan 2003 11:14:28 -0000
Received: (qmail 32668 invoked from network); 11 Jan 2003 11:14:23 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO dci-server.dcomp.com) (68.98.217.160)
  by www.mailshell.com with SMTP; 11 Jan 2003 11:14:23 -0000
From: ExcelTips <awyatt@dcomp.com>
To: "Mailshell User" <nospam@mailshell.com>
Subject: ExcelTips for 11 January 2003
Date: Sat, 11 Jan 2003 04:00:00 -0700
Message-ID: <LYRIS-208059-351572-2003.01.11-04.00.01--nospam#mailshell.com@lists.exceltips.com>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain;
	charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Priority: 3 (Normal)
X-MSMail-Priority: Normal
X-Mailer: Microsoft Outlook IMO, Build 9.0.2416 (9.0.2910.0)
Importance: Normal
X-MimeOLE: Produced By Microsoft MimeOLE V5.50.4920.2300
List-Unsubscribe: <mailto:leave-exceltips-208059N@lists.exceltips.com>
Reply-To: "ExcelTips Newsletter" <exceltips@lists.exceltips.com>

ExcelTips for 11 January 2003                    Copyright 2002 by DCI
**********************************************************************

In This Issue...
----------------
   Tips
     * Counting Records Matching Multiple Criteria
     * Referencing the Last Cell in a Column
     * Rounding Numbers
     * Using the MROUND Worksheet Function
   Help Wanted
     * Automatically Converting to GMT
     * Using the Keyboard to Select and Resize a Chart Object
   Publisher and Copyright Information
   Important Links
   Subscription Information


          FREE downloadable book on time-saving Excel tips
         Find faster and easier ways to do your Excel work!
                 Open the book directly from Excel!
              Easily search for the solution you need.
             http://www.add-ins.com/index.htm?freebook3


**********************************************************************
     TIPS * TIPS * TIPS * TIPS * TIPS * TIPS * TIPS * TIPS * TIPS
**********************************************************************
If you have an idea for a tip, send it our way. You can e-mail the
suggestion to awyatt@dcomp.com. Any tips contributed will be credited
in the issue in which they appear.


------------------------------
Counting Records Matching Multiple Criteria
------------------------------
It is not unusual to use Excel to create small databases. For
instance, you might keep a list of your poodle-breeders club members
in Excel, or you might use it to maintain a list of your active sales
contacts. In those instances, you might wonder how you could get a
count of the number of records that meet more than one criteria.

Let's say that you are analyzing your membership list, and you wanted
to determine a count of the records in which the gender column
contains "F" and the city column contains a particular city, such as
"Norwood". This, of course, would be helpful because it would answer
the burning question of how many female members of your group live in
Norwood.

Excel includes a number of worksheet functions that are handy for
determining the count of records in a list. How you can use these in a
situation where two criteria must be met may not be immediately
obvious. Let's examine four specific ways you can achieve the desired
goal of female members from Norwood. (Assume that column B is the
gender column, and column H is the city column.)

The first way to solve the problem is through the use of the DCOUNTA
function. This function allows you to define a set of criteria, and
use those criteria as the basis for analyzing a list of data. Like all
the data functions in Excel, DCOUNTA relies upon three parameters: the
data range, the column to use in the comparisons, and the criteria
range. To use the function, set up a criteria table in an unused area
of your worksheet. For instance, you could set up the following in
cells AA1 through AB2:

       |    AA    |    AB   |
   1   |  Gender  |   City  |
   2   |    F     | Norwood |

Then, assuming your original data table is in cells A1:K500 (obviously
a large poodle breeders' club), then you could use the following to
determine the count:

     =DCOUNTA(A1:K500,1,AA1:AB2)

The result is a count that meets the criteria you specified in
AA1:AB2. Note, as well, that the names you used in AA1 and AB1 must
exactly match the labels you used in your table records. When they do,
the contents of the Gender column (column B) must be F and the
contents of the City column (column H) must be Norwood in order for
the record to be added to the count.

The second solution is to use an array formula to return a single
answer. The array formula interestingly uses the SUM function and a
little bit of Boolean arithmetic to determine if a record should be
counted. Consider the following:

     =SUM((B2:B500="F")*(H2:H500="Norwood"))

Simply type the above formula in a cell and then finish it by pressing
Ctrl+Shift+Enter; this lets Excel know you are entering an array
formula. The formula works because it compares the contents of each
row in the array, in turn, according to the criteria specified in the
formula. It first compares the contents of the B column with "F"; if
it matches, then the comparison returns True, which is the numeric
value 1. The contents of column F are then compared to "Norwood". If
that comparison is true, then 1 is returned. Thus, 1 * 1 would equal
1, and this is added to the SUM of the array. If either comparison is
False, then the numeric value 0 is returned, and 1 * 0 equals 0 (as
does 0 * 0 and 0 * 1), which doesn't affect the running SUM.

A third and closely related approach is to use the SUMPRODUCT
function, but not in an array formula. You could simply use the
following in any cell where you wanted to know if the two criteria are
met:

     SUMPRODUCT((B2:B500="F")*(H2:H500="Norwood"))

Remember, this is not an array formula, so you don't need to press
Ctrl+Shift+Enter. The formula works, again, through the magic of
Boolean math.

A fourth possible solution, which is a bit more manual than those
discussed already, is to use the AutoFilter feature along with a
subtotal. Assuming your data records are in A1:K500, with column
labels in row 1, you would follow these steps:

   1. Select any cell in the data table.
   2. Choose Filter from the Data menu, then choose AutoFilter. Excel
      should display the AutoFilter drop-down indicators next to each
      column label in row 1.
   3. Using the drop-down indicator for the gender column (column B),
      choose F. Your list is automatically filtered to only display
      female members.
   4. Using the drop-down indicator for the city column (column H),
      choose Norwood. Your list is automatically displayed to only
      display female members living in Norwood.
   5. At the bottom of the data table (row 501), in any column
      desired, enter the following formula:

          =SUBTOTAL(3,B2:B500)

This formula causes the SUBTOTAL function to apply the COUNTA function
to derive a subtotal. In other words, it returns a count of all
records that are displayed by the filtering; this is the count
desired.

A fifth approach is to use the Conditional Sum Wizard to come up with
a formula for you. (The Conditional Sum Wizard is available as an
Excel add-in. Choose Tools | Add-Ins to make sure that the wizard is
installed and available.) Follow these steps to use the Conditional
Sum Wizard:

   1. Select a cell somewhere within the data you want to analyze.
   2. Choose Conditional Sum from the Tools menu. Excel displays the
      first step of the Conditional Sum Wizard. The full range of your
      data should already be shown in the dialog box.
   3. Click on Next. Excel displays the next step of the wizard.
   4. In the Column to Sum drop-down list, choose Gender.
   5. In the Column drop-down, choose Gender.
   6. In the Is drop-down, choose the equal sign.
   7. In the This Value drop-down, choose F.
   8. Click on Add. The condition you specified now appears in the
      dialog box.
   9. In the Column drop-down, choose City.
  10. In the Is drop-down, choose the equal sign.
  11. In the This Value drop-down, choose Norwood.
  12. Click on Add. The second condition now appears in the dialog
      box.
  13. Click on Next. Excel displays the third step of the wizard.
  14. Choose Copy Just the Formula To a Single Cell.
  15. Click on Next. Excel displays the fourth (and final) step of the
      wizard.
  16. In the worksheet, click on the cell you want to contain the
      result of your formula.
  17. Click on Finish.

The result is a formula, appropriate for the conditions you specified,
in the cell you selected in step 1.

There are undoubtedly countless other possible solutions you could use
to figure out the count of records. These, however, are the "pick of
the lot," and allow you to determine the answer quickly and easily.

(Thanks to Daniel Fuld, Graham Hendry, Steve Aprahamian, Ray Blake,
Randy Harmelink, Dean Cardno, Andrija Vrcan, Russ Reimann, George
Atkins, Melinda Broaders, Tony Beckett, Claus Henriksen, Toth Bela,
Fred Burg, Sreekanth Jayabalan, Mark W. Perkins, Glenn Bumford, Alan
Maughan, Patrick Whitchurch, Aidan Heritage, and Gary Montgomery for
contributing to this tip.)


   Got an Excel-related product or service you want to let others
   know about? Advertising in ExcelTips is a cost-effective way to
   let thousands of serious Excel users know about you. For more
   info, visit the Web site (http://www.ExcelTips.com/), or send
   a blank e-mail to ExcelTips-Advertising@lists.vitalnews.com.


------------------------------
Referencing the Last Cell in a Column
------------------------------
Subscriber Patty Laferriere asked about a common scenario, in which
column B contains quite a bit of data, and information can be added to
the cells in the column at any time. In a formula in cell C4, Patty
wants to see the value at the bottom of those cells in column B that
contain values. Thus, if cells B1:B27 contain data, then in cell C4
Patty wants to see the value that is in cell B27. If three more pieces
of data are added to column B, then the value in C4 should contain the
value in B30.

The solution to this problem depends on whether you can count on the
data in column B containing blank cells or not. If the data is
contiguous--it doesn't contain any blank cells--then you can use the
following formula in C4:

     =INDIRECT("B"&COUNTA(B:B))

This constructs an address based on the last cell in the column, and
then uses the INDIRECT function to return the value at that address.

If it is possible for there to be blanks in column B, then the
following formula will work:

     =INDIRECT("B"&MAX(ROW(1:65535)*(B1:B65535<>"")))

Again, the INDIRECT function is used to fetch the actual value, but
the address used by INDIRECT is put together differently.

A different approach is to use the VLOOKUP function to return the
value. If column B consists of numeric values, then the following
formula in C4 will work just fine:

     =VLOOKUP(9.99999999999999E+307,B:B,1)

If column B contains text, then the numeric lookup won't work, but the
following will:

     =VLOOKUP(REPT("z",50),B:B,1)

(Thanks to Daniel Fuld, Steve Aprahamian, Randy Harmelink, Russ
Reimann, George Atkins, Melinda Broaders, Joel Courtheyn, Claus
Henriksen, Glenn Bumford, Alan Maughan, Patrick Whitchurch, Aidan
Heritage, Fred Burg, Theo Claas, Bill Bartley, Cor Heisterkamp, and
Henric Bladh for contributing to this tip.)


------------------------------
Rounding Numbers
------------------------------
Excel provides a number of built-in worksheet functions for rounding
numbers. The exact function you should use depends on exactly what you
need to do with a value.

The first worksheet function is ROUND. This function allows you to
essentially round to any power of ten. The syntax is as follows:

     =ROUND(num, digits)

The num argument is the number you want to round, while digits
indicates how many digits you want the result rounded to. If digits is
a positive value, then it represents the number of decimal places to
use when rounding. Thus, if digits is 3, then num is rounded to three
decimal places. If digits is zero, then ROUND returns a rounded whole
number. If digits is a negative number, then ROUND returns a number
rounded to the number of tens represented by digits. Thus, if digits
is -2, then ROUND returns a number rounded to the nearest 100.

Two other worksheet functions that return rounded values are ROUNDUP
and ROUNDDOWN. These functions use the same arguments as ROUND and
behave virtually identically. The only difference is that ROUNDUP
always rounds num up, meaning away from 0. ROUNDDOWN is the opposite,
always rounding down, toward 0.


   If you use Word, you need WordTips. Learn how to become a Word
   expert by learning the tips, hints, and tricks that make the
   difference. Same high quality as ExcelTips. Covers all popular
   versions of Word. Visit http://www.VitalNews.com/wordtips/
   for more info on this FREE weekly newsletter. For a free sample
   issue, send an e-mail to WordTips-Sample@lists.vitalnews.com.


------------------------------
Using the MROUND Worksheet Function
------------------------------
In the previous tip you learned how you can round numbers using
regular worksheet functions. These functions work great when you want
to round a number to some decimal position. What if you want to round
a number to some odd value, however? For instance, what if you want to
round a value to the nearest multiple of 7, or to the nearest 50?

For these times, you should use the MROUND worksheet function. This
function is provided as part of the Analysis ToolPak; it is not
inherent to Excel. To use it, install the Analysis ToolPak (which many
people do when Excel is first installed), and then choose Add-Ins from
the Tools menu to make sure the Analysis ToolPak is selected.

The syntax for the MROUND function is as follows:

     =MROUND(num, multiple)

The num argument is the number you want to round, while multiple is
the value you want used in the rounding. Thus, if you want to round to
the nearest 50, then multiple would be 50.

If you decide to use MROUND, it is important to remember that num and
multiple must be the same sign. If one of them is positive and the
other negative, then Excel returns a #NUM! error.


**********************************************************************
Step up to the PROFESSIONAL version of ExcelTips--ExcelTips Premium.
This week ExcelTips Premium subscribers also learned about: 

     * Dealing with Circular References
     * Entering Numbers in Excel
     * Calculating Future Workdays
     * Getting User Input in a Dialog Box

Each weekly newsletter is in a professional PDF layout, and presents
DOUBLE THE TIPS (Premium subscribers see articles you won't in regular
ExcelTips) with great, useful graphics.  Plus, ExcelTips Premium
subscribers get valuable money-saving benefits. For more information,
(including a sample issue) visit the following Web page:

     http://store.vitalnews.com/etprem.html


**********************************************************************
        HELP WANTED * HELP WANTED * HELP WANTED * HELP WANTED
**********************************************************************
This section is for those having problems making Excel behave. If you
have a problem, send it to ETHelp@VitalNews.com. If you have a
solution for a Help Wanted problem, send it to awyatt@dcomp.com. Your
response may be used in a future issue, in which case you will be
credited with the answer.


------------------------------
Automatically Converting to GMT
------------------------------
I am setting up a log sheet for my use. All I basically need are three
columns for information. This is where the problem comes in. Two of
the columns deal with time, in one column I want local time, and in
the other column I would like to display Zulu time (GMT time). When I
type in the local time, is there any formula I can use to fill in the
Zulu time automatically? I am in Pacific Standard Zone, and this
difference is sometimes -8 hrs, and sometimes -7 hrs difference from
Zulu time. I would prefer it if the formula could take daylight
savings time into account, without me needing to remember when it is
in effect. Any ideas? (Harold Palmer)


------------------------------
Using the Keyboard to Select and Resize a Chart Object
------------------------------
Is there a way, using the keyboard, to select and resize a chart
object in a worksheet? I don't want to use the mouse; I need to use
the keyboard. (Mary Keaton)


**********************************************************************
                 PUBLISHER and COPYRIGHT INFORMATION
**********************************************************************
ExcelTips is published weekly by Discovery Computing Inc. (DCI), PO
Box 2145, Mesa, AZ  85214. ExcelTips is a trademark of DCI. Copyright
2003 by DCI, All Rights Reserved. All broadcast, publication, or
retransmission is strictly prohibited without prior written permission
from the publisher. Full information on distribution rights can be
found in the FAQ at the ExcelTips Web site.


**********************************************************************
         IMPORTANT LINKS * IMPORTANT LINKS * IMPORTANT LINKS
**********************************************************************

WEB ADDRESSES
-------------
ExcelTips Web page -          http://www.ExcelTips.com/
ExcelTips FAQ -               http://www.ExcelTips.com/questions.htm
ExcelTips Archives -          http://store.VitalNews.com/etarch.html
Advertising in ExcelTips -    http://www.VitalNews.com/advert.htm
Vital News Store -            http://store.VitalNews.com/


E-MAIL ADDRESSES
---------------
Help Wanted questions -     Help@ExcelTips.com
ExcelTips sample issue -    ExcelTips-Sample@lists.ExcelTips.com
Advertising in ExcelTips -  ExcelTips-Advertising@lists.ExcelTips.com
Editor and Publisher -      awyatt@dcomp.com


**********************************************************************
         SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION * SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION
**********************************************************************
TO RECEIVE ExcelTips regularly via e-mail at no charge, send a blank
e-mail to < join-exceltips@lists.ExcelTips.com >.

You are currently subscribed to exceltips as: [nospam@mailshell.com]
To unsubscribe, send a blank message to leave-exceltips-208059N@lists.exceltips.com

