Received: (qmail 11199 invoked from network); 18 Jan 2003 00:35:22 -0000
Received: from dev214.mailshell.com (HELO mailshell.com) (71.129.195.163)
  by dev50.mailshell.com with SMTP; 18 Jan 2003 00:35:22 -0000
Received: (qmail 8086 invoked by uid 99); 18 Jan 2003 00:35:22 -0000
Received: (qmail 26996 invoked from network); 18 Jan 2003 00:35:21 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO r-comm1.r-comm.net) (63.163.81.10)
  by www.mailshell.com with SMTP; 18 Jan 2003 00:35:21 -0000
Received: from dell-8200 (user-100-81-163-63.r-comm.net [63.163.81.100]) by r-comm1.r-comm.net with SMTP (Microsoft Exchange Internet Mail Service Version 5.5.2656.59)
	id CQ6A45M5; Fri, 17 Jan 2003 19:38:55 -0500
Message-ID: <41216-22003161803513328@dell-8200>
From: "Archangel Health News" <news@aomega.com>
To: "Mailshell User" <nospam@mailshell.com>
Subject: Jan / Feb 2003 Health Newsletter
Date: Fri, 17 Jan 2003 19:35:13 -0500
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-type: text/plain; charset=US-ASCII

==========================================

 Archangel Health News -- January 17, 2003

 "One of the longest running internet e-zines
 focused on health, fitness, and nutrition!"

 An online version of this issue appears at:
 http://www.aomega.com/ahs/newsletters/nl010203.htm

 Unsubscribe instructions appear below.

==========================================

Happy New Year! We hope that you will find the information presented
in this edition of the Archangel Health News informative and helpful
towards your goal of optimum health.

Featured in this month's issue:

  1. HEALTH BYTES:
      Facts and Tips for Better Living!

  2. WELLNESS QUESTIONS & ANSWERS

  3. FEATURED MINI-ARTICLE: 
     "How Much Exercise Is Enough?"

  4. THE HERBAL CORNER: Willow Bark

  5. PRODUCT-OF-THE-MONTH: Daily BioBasics
      Complete Nutritional Formula for Optimum Health

  6. HEALTHY RECIPE-OF-THE-MONTH:
      Apricot Scones

Do you have a favorite health-related web site or health topic you
would like to see covered in our newsletter? Just write to us and let
us know what it is and we will consider including it in a future
issue. For additional information, or if you have a particular health
question or concern, please send an e-mail to us at
support@aomega.com - we are always happy to correspond with our
valued subscribers and customers.

==========================================
Your Body NEEDS Calcium AND Magnesium for
        -- OPTIMUM HEALTH! --

Get the Best - Try CALMAG PLUS Today!
http://www.aomega.com/ahs/c6105a.htm
==========================================

==========================================

 HEALTH BYTES
 * Facts and Tips for Better Living

==========================================

WHAT THE NEW ORGANIC RULES MEAN -- In October, 2002, the Organic Food
Production Act became law, requiring organic-food purveyors to meet
United States regulated standards. Farmers, manufacturers, or grocery
stores hoping their products will be deemed legally organic will have
to keep the following requirements in mind: No pesticides,
fungicides, or chemical fertilizers for plants. No antibiotics or
medicines for animals. No fertilizing with sewage sludge. No
irridation (a germ- killing procedure used for plants). No
bio-engineerings. No commingling (organic products must not have
contact with non-organic ones, including soil, storage, transport,
grocery shelves, etc.). No nonorganic ingredients in animal feed.
Animals must have access to the outdoors. Farms must be free of
"taboo" chemicals and procedures for a minimum of three years.
Farmers must participate in soil-conservation efforts. Farms and
manufacturing facilities must undergo periodic inspections.

WHAT TO LOOK FOR ON NEW ORGANIC LABELS -- "100% organic" - contains
only organic ingredients; may feature USDA seal.  "Organic" - At
least 95% organic; may feature USDA seal. "Made with organic
ingredients" -­ At least 70% organic; no USDA seal, but up to three
organic ingredients may be listed on label. For products with less
than 70% organic ingredients, the organic components may be listed on
the information panel only; the word "organic" may not appear on the
front of the package.

PEANUT FYI -- The peanut probably has more aliases than any other
food. It has been called a goober, guinea seed, pinda, pistache de
terre, groundnut, monkey nut, earthnut, manilla nut and more. But
make no mistake, the peanut is NOT a nut, even though it has been
tagged with a number of nutty names. The peanut is a legume that
grows underground. It can rightly be called a ground pea because it
belongs to the pea family.

WINE - A HEALTH DRINK? -- Wine drinkers have healthier lifestyles
than people who drink other kinds of alcoholic beverages or who do
not drink at all. A recent study conducted at the University of North
Carolina shows that people who prefer wine consistently eat less fat
and cholesterol, smoke less, and exercise more than those who drink
other spirits. Abstainers, who made up about a fifth of the study's
subjects, ate fewer fruits and vegetables and more red meat, and
smoked more than wine drinkers. The implication of the study is that
the benefits of wine drinking may not be merely physiological;
preferring wine may be part of an overall pattern that contributes to
better health.

GINGER AND KNEE PAIN -- People with osteoarthritis of the knee may be
able to reduce symptoms of the disease by consuming highly
concentrated ginger extract, according to a preliminary study's
findings. In the study, 247 patients with osteoarthritis of the knee
who were experiencing moderate to severe pain were split into two
groups. One group took purified, concentrated ginger extract while
the other group was given an inactive placebo pill. 63 percent of
patients taking ginger reported a reduction in knee pain while
standing, compared with 50 percent of those who took the placebo.
Those taking ginger also reported less pain after walking 50 feet.

EASY WAY TO TREAT DRY PATCHES -- To relieve dry patches, massage in
vegetable shortening like Crisco. Sounds absurd, but it is actually
emollient rich and full of vitamins and replenishing oils - plus, it
is preservative and fragrance free.

==========================================

 WELLNESS QUESTIONS & ANSWERS

==========================================

** Q & A #1:

What about iron?

For decades we have been told that we need iron to "build our blood,"
and therefore, many people believe they need to supplement with
additional iron. However, even women who lose some iron each month
during their monthly cycle may not need additional supplementation to
replenish their iron. When you eat a balanced diet, you usually
consume enough iron to maintain the proper iron levels. Iron is
usually present in green-leafy vegetables like spinach. It is also
found in red meat and liver. In fact, most people do not need to
include an iron supplement in their diet because too much iron is not
good for our health. Recently, it was discovered that iron stimulates
free radical production in the body when the iron levels become too
high. As many of you are aware, free radicals can cause all types of
havoc in the body resulting in damage to tissue. Therefore, it is
recommended that you do not supplement with iron unless you have been
diagnosed as needing it by a licensed health care professional. If
you do need additional iron, talk to your health care professional
about the need to consume adequate levels of vitamin C since it helps
absorption and utilization of iron. Ask them about consuming coffee,
tea, and dairy products while taking an iron supplement since these
may inhibit iron absorption. Be careful with dietary supplements and
multivitamins. Companies who are up on the current research do not
include iron in their supplements. If you donate blood on a regular
basis, you help keep a record of the amount of iron in your body in
addition to helping others.

** Q & A #2:

Since fruit gets sweeter as it ripens, does that mean it contains
more calories?

No. The fruit contains the same amount of calories at all stages
after it matures and during the ripening process. The reason it
tastes sweeter is that the larger carbohydrate molecules are being
broken down by naturally occurring enzymes; these produce a sweeter
taste, even though the same amount of carbohydrate is actually
present. You can liken this scenario to eating a soda cracker, which
is mostly made up of larger molecules of starch. Hold the cracker in
your mouth a few moments, and it will begin to taste sweet, even with
the same amount of carbohydrates.

** Q & A #3:

Is it okay to stop a sneeze?

Actually, no. But if you do try to hold your breath, do it by sealing
your lips and lightly pinching your nose while still sneezing. If you
pinch too tight, you may create enormous pressure in your nose and
throat. This can force (or spread) infection up into your sinus
tissues and ears through your eustachian tubes.

** Q & A #4:

Do food-combining diets work?

For weight loss purposes, you should always remember a very important
factor - calories are calories. Still, proteins, fats, and
carbohydrates require different enzymes to digest. And foods that are
high in fats and proteins naturally travel through the digestive
tract more slowly, because it takes longer for them to digest. By
comparison, carbohydrates travel through much faster. So you can
greatly support the function of your digestive system by partially
separating the foods somewhat when you eat them. In general, eat your
carbohydrates earlier in the meal. This way they can travel on
through, which permits adequate time for the digestion of proteins
and fat. This naturally results in less gas, bloating and other
digestive upsets. This practice is usually referred to as "food
combining" and several books, loaded with good tips, are available on
the subject.

** Q & A #5:

Can you provide me with some tips to relieve coughing?

Coughing is an interference of the breathing responses to airflow. A
natural air effect common to a respiratory condition, coughing is the
airway to breathing congestion and sensitivities. There are many
different kinds of treatments prescribed for coughing. Some of these
include: (a) drinking your favorite "hot" teas and broths daily; (b)
taking warm oil baths or showers nightly prior to bed time while
rubbing or massaging your body with your favorite herbal oils during
your bath or shower; (c) sitting quietly inhaling and exhaling
through the nostrils; (d) sipping lukewarm water at room temperature
frequently and slowly dissolving the water through the esophagus
during the day; (e) keeping warm as much as you can; (f) having
someone massage your upper back and chest areas. These remedies can
help soothe, cleanse, and clear the blocking of the airways, thus
reducing the cough.

==========================================

 FEATURED MINI-ARTICLE
 * "How Much Exercise Is Enough?"

==========================================

In fact, the question may actually be: "How often is enough?"
According to fitness expert, Jaime Brenkus, small amounts of exercise
more often is where it is at. And he should know. Jaime speaks as a
certified health and fitness instructor from the American College of
Sports Medicine, the national standard for sports team trainers at
the professional and collegiate levels, physical therapists, and
top-quality fitness experts.

Recent research backs him up, too. The American College of Sports
Medicine and the Centers for Disease Control have revised the
exercise standards of the eighties. It is no longer considered
necessary to work out for at least an hour three times a week. The
newest research shows that you can achieve the same beneficial
cardiovascular effect by doing ten minute bouts of exercise several
times during the week. Such exercise could be as simple as a brisk
ten minute walk or stationary bike ride in the morning and evening.
It is now known that the effects of exercise are cumulative. That is
good news indeed, because most people find it hard to dedicate
significant amounts of time at any one session.

Research also shows the value of aerobic exercise in maintaining
healthy cholesterol levels. For instance, people who walk a mile in
twenty minutes improve their good cholesterol, the high density
lipoproteins (HDLs), just as much as those who covered the mile in
almost half the time. Most of the benefit of exercise comes from
doing a little bit.

Ten minute workouts are state-of-the-art today. Why? One reason is
that people will do them. And keep in mind that the benefits of
exercise are cumulative. Think about it: if you exercise six times
per week for ten minutes each time, over the course of a week you
have completed one hour of body conditioning. That is more than most
do. Getting ten minutes in during your lunch break is easy.
Activities like climbing a few stairs, walking across parking lots,
mowing the grass, all add up.

"We are talking about pure physics," says Brenkus. "What is the
difference if you work out three times a week for thirty minutes or
nine times for ten minutes? And, nine times is less than just ten
minutes in the morning and evening, Monday through Friday. Combined
with sensible eating and taking quality supplements, fitness is a
no-brainer."

The days between Thanksgiving and mid-January usually take their toll
on our waistline. As we face the most difficult time of the year for
staying fit, make it your commitment to get as many of those short
ten minute bouts in as often as you can. They will go a long way
toward keeping you well through the winter and your body feeling good.

==========================================

 THE HERBAL CORNER
 * Willow Bark
 
==========================================

The use of Willow Bark dates back to the time of Hippocrates (400 BC)
when patients were advised to chew on the bark to reduce fever and
inflammation. Willow Bark has been used throughout the centuries in
China and Europe, and continues to be used by herbalists today for
the treatment of fever, pain (particularly low back pain), headache,
and inflammatory conditions such as arthritis. Although the bark of
the white willow is most commonly used medicinally, the bark of
related species, such as black willow, have been shown to have the
same beneficial effects.

The willow family includes a number of different species of deciduous
trees and shrubs native to Europe, Asia, and some parts of North
America. Some of the more commonly known are white willow/European
willow (Salix alba), black willow/pussy willow ( Salix nigra), crack
willow (Salix fragilis), purple willow (Salix purpurea), and weeping
willow (Salix babylonica). The Willow Bark sold in Europe and the
United States usually includes a combination of the bark from white,
purple, and crack willows. 

Willow Bark's most important medicinal qualities are its ability to
ease pain and reduce inflammation. In fact, it was from salicylic
acid, one of the ingredients in Willow Bark, that aspirin was
originally synthesized. Studies have identified several other
components of Willow Bark which have antioxidant, fever-reducing,
antiseptic, and immune-boosting effects.

Studies suggest that Willow Bark may be useful for the following
conditions:

1. Headache: Willow Bark has been shown to relieve headaches and some
experts suggest that it may be preferable to certain conventional
therapies such as ibuprofen and other non-steroidal
anti-inflammatories, which have been linked to serious
gastrointestinal side effects. Large-scale studies are necessary to
fully determine the safety and effectiveness of Willow Bark for
chronic or recurrent headaches, however. 

2. Low Back Pain: In a study of nearly 200 people with low back pain,
participants who received Willow Bark experienced a significant
improvement in pain compared to those who received placebo. Moreover,
participants who received higher doses of Willow Bark (240 mg
salicin) had more significant pain relief than those who received low
doses (120 mg salicin). 

3. Osteoarthritis: In a small study of people with osteoarthritis of
the neck or lower back, those who received Willow Bark experienced
significant improvement in symptoms compared to those who received
placebo. A similar study of 78 patients hospitalized with
osteoarthritis of the knee or hip joint found that patients who
received Willow Bark experienced significant pain relief compared to
those who received placebo. 

4. Other Conditions: Some professional herbalists may recommend
Willow Bark for the following conditions, although at present, no
scientific studies have been conducted to support these uses: sexual
dysfunction, mild diarrhea with cramps, fever, flu, tendonitis,
bursitis, ankylosing spondylitis (a form of rheumatoid arthritis
affecting the lower spine).
 
Willow Bark is available as dried bulk herb (used to make tea);
powdered herb in capsule form; tincture; and standardized extract
either in tablets or liquid. Because Willow Bark contains salicin,
people who are allergic or sensitive to salicylates (such as aspirin)
should not use Willow Bark. There is no evidence of adverse effects
associated with using Willow Bark. However, negative side effects
such as gastrointestinal irritation and ulcers are potentially
associated with all compounds containing salicylates. Overdoses of
Willow Bark may cause skin rash, stomach inflammation/irritation,
nausea, vomiting, kidney inflammation, and tinnitus.

==========================================

 PRODUCT-OF-THE-MONTH

 * DAILY BIOBASICS
   http://www.aomega.com/ahs/d6132a.htm

   Your Complete Nutritional Support
   Contains Vitamins, Minerals, Fiber, 
   Enzymes, Antioxidants, and More!

==========================================

Start off the New Year right and include DAILY BIOBASICS in your diet
- it is a "must" for anyone who feels that they do not eat properly
or for those who are concerned about their daily nutritional needs.
Daily BioBasics is a powdered dietary supplement that you mix with
your favorite juice or water. Just two scoops per day of this
all-natural, safe, and effective product contains all of the
essential multivitamins, minerals, fiber, essential digestive
enzymes, super green algae, vegetable extracts, herbs, and
super-antioxidant protector nutrients that your body needs to
detoxify, optimize energy and vitality, boost the immune system,
lower the risks of degenerative diseases, and improve your overall
level of health and wellness!

A one month supply of DAILY BIOBASICS costs just $55.00 regular price
(or just $49 for AutoShip members which includes FREE shipping!)
Please e-mail us for more details about the AutoShip program or
request that we register you as an ASAP Member by indicating that in
the COMMENTS field located at the bottom of our secured online order
form. Additional details about DAILY BIOBASICS can be found on our
web site at http://www.aomega.com/ahs/d6132a.htm  To ORDER online, by
phone, or by mail, please see http://www.aomega.com/ahs/ordering.htm 
(if you are already a Life Plus member, please remember to reference
your member PIN on your order).

==========================================

 HEALTHY RECIPE-OF-THE-MONTH
 * Apricot Scones

==========================================

  2-1/2 cups all-purpose flour
  1/2 cup sugar
  2 teaspoons baking powder
  1/2 teaspoon baking soda
  1/4 teaspoon salt
  1/4 cup chilled butter or stick margarine, cut into small pieces
  1/2 cup finely chopped dried apricots
  1/2 cup low-fat buttermilk
  2 large eggs
  Cooking spray
  2 teaspoons sugar
  1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F.

2. Lightly spoon flour into dry measuring cups; level with a knife.
Combine flour and the next 4 ingredients (flour through salt), and
cut in butter with a pastry blender or 2 knives until the mixture
resembles coarse meal. Stir in the apricots. Combine the buttermilk
and eggs, stirring with a whisk. Add to flour mixture, stirring just
until moist (dough will be sticky).

3. Turn dough out onto a lightly floured surface; knead lightly 4
times. Pat dough into a 9-inch circle on a baking sheet coated with
cooking spray. Cut dough into 12 wedges, cutting into but not through
dough. Combine 2 teaspoons sugar and cinnamon, and sprinkle over
dough. Bake at 400 degrees F. for 20 minutes or until golden. Serve
warm.

Yield: 1 dozen (serving size: 1 scone)

Nutritional Information per Serving: Calories 196 (24% from fat); Fat
5.2g (sat 2.8g, mono 1.5g, poly 0.4g); Protein 4.4g; Carbohydrates
33.7g; Fiber 1.3g; Cholesterol 47mg; Iron 1.8mg; Sodium 239mg;
Calcium 71mg

==========================================

Please feel free to forward this newsletter to anyone you know that
might benefit from any of the above information - or refer them to
http://www.aomega.com/ahs/newsletters/nl010203.htm - we would greatly
appreciate it!

Please e-mail your comments, questions, or suggestions to
support@aomega.com

Thank you for reading this edition of the Archangel Health News and
may God bless you and your HEALTH!

Darrin and Sandi Quiles
Archangel Health and Nutrition Store
http://www.aomega.com/ahs/index.htm
Three Ways to Order: http://www.aomega.com/ahs/ordering.htm

Buy 6 of any one product featured on our site and get 1 FREE!

To receive a text catalog of all the health products available
on our site please send a blank e-mail to catalog@aomega.com

Archangel Health News Archive: http://www.aomega.com/ahs/news.htm

Subscribe to our sister publication, the "Wellness Weekly"
See http://www.topica.com/lists/wellness_weekly/subscribe or
Send a blank e-mail to wellness_weekly-subscribe@topica.com

==========================================

To cancel your subscription to the Archangel Health News just send an
e-mail to news@aomega.com with "unsubscribe" as the subject. Please
insure that the name and e-mail address on your unsubscribe request
is the same one that you originally subscribed with - this will make
it possible for us to successfully find and remove you from the list.

==========================================

Copyright © 2003 by Sandi and Darrin Quiles. All rights reserved.

Please note: the information contained herein has been compiled from
various sources. The above statements have not been evaluated by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. We make no claims, either
expressed or implied, that any products mentioned in this newsletter
will cure disease, replace prescription medication, or supersede
sound medical advice.

