Received: (qmail 27590 invoked from network); 13 Jan 2003 17:23:19 -0000
Received: from dev213.mailshell.com (HELO mailshell.com) (@71.129.195.163)
  by dev50.mailshell.com with SMTP; 13 Jan 2003 17:23:19 -0000
Received: (qmail 31780 invoked by uid 99); 13 Jan 2003 17:23:19 -0000
Received: (qmail 31852 invoked from network); 13 Jan 2003 17:23:18 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO apollo.business2.com) (64.12.49.184)
  by www.mailshell.com with SMTP; 13 Jan 2003 17:23:18 -0000
Received: from apollo (apollo [64.12.49.184])
	by apollo.business2.com (8.12.4/8.12.4) with SMTP id h0DHAq9n010076
	for nospam@mailshell.com; Mon, 13 Jan 2003 12:16:10 -0500 (EST)
To: "Mailshell User" <nospam@mailshell.com>
Message-ID: <10424781704100.054656731721247964.BulkMailer@business2.com>
Date: Mon, 13 Jan 2003 12:10:19 -0500 (EST)
From: "Business 2.0 - Marketing Focus" <newsletters@business2.com>
Subject: Ford Starts It Up
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain;charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Make Your Sales, Marketing and Support Teams Instantly Successful
FREE Test Drive ? Register Here!  Sign Up for a Test Drive
Receive A Free whitepaper *How to Select a Sales Force that
Sells.*  Salesforce.com. Success. Not Software. Register Here
http://www.salesforce.com/us/orderEntry/partner.jsp?promocode=team-edition_5Rh
http://ar.atwola.com/redir/B0/EjS6oVhoIQ0VvyaLF9XHDpX-b5K0pmDgESzJWvfzu8VZYHx51UMdhA$$/http://www.salesforce.com/us/orderEntry/partner.jsp?promocode=team-edition_5Rh
* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *

MARKETING FOCUS

Ford Starts It Up
By Thomas Mucha

http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46392,00.html

The Rolling Stones seem to be everywhere -- 60 Minutes, the cover
of Fortune, on tour [sponsored by E-Trade], and now in ads by
Ford Motor, which has made "Start Me Up" the centerpiece of its
2003 marketing campaign. Ford likes to boast that it's the first
time the Stones' classic, which Microsoft used for its Windows 95
launch, has been licensed by an auto company. "We picked it to
send the message that Ford is back -- with a vengeance," Ford
division president Steve Lyons said in a statement.

Ford may or may not be back, but Detroit's use of music certainly
is. General Motors's Cadillac division has been blaring Led
Zeppelin's "Rock and Roll" to great success, while Dodge has been
rocking with Aerosmith. Toyota USA has cut a co-marketing deal
with Phil Collins, and Chrysler will soon debut its Celine Dion
advertising campaign.

What's going on? The power of music, of course. More specifically
-- what music means to different generations of car buyers. To
get the lowdown on this strategy, particularly on how to bridge
generation gaps, Business 2.0 spoke with Ann Fishman, associate
professor at New York University and president of New
Orleans-based consulting firm Generational Targeted Marketing. 

Business 2.0: What's behind this trend?
Ann Fishman: The company that kicked this off was Microsoft. With
their Windows 95 campaign, they were really targeting two
generations at the same time -- baby boomers and Gen Xers. They
wanted to use a band that would appeal to both. The Rolling
Stones fit that mold. Microsoft also used the kind of quick
editing that Gen Xers had seen on MTV all their lives. So in
addition to having the right music, they had the visuals right
too. It was brilliant marketing.

So today everyone is copying it. But you have to be sure that the
music is right. That's where the secret to success is. Gen X is
very musical, and baby boomers are very nostalgic about their
music. But all music does not fit all generations. So you've got
to ask yourself: Who do I want to buy my car? Am I offending any
other generations with my choice of music? Music can work for you
or against you.
 
B2: What about for Ford?
Fishman: It kind of surprised me when I saw it. It made me think
of Microsoft. It will make every Gen Xer think of Microsoft too.
They'll know it's a copycat. Why make them think about another
brand? It doesn't make marketing sense. 

B2: Who has done it right?
Fishman: Daimler went after younger baby boomers, using that
Janice Joplin song ("Mercedes Benz"). That was brilliant, though
I didn't care for their ad that used Marlene Dietrich singing
"Falling in Love Again" and highlighted the long history of the
company. It was a generational foot slip. It's harder for the
World War II generation to think of that history without
associating it with Germany and war. 

B2: How does music play to different generations of consumers?
Fishman: Gen X is marketing savvy. It takes more than bells and
whistles to sell to them. A Gen Xer's head may pop up when they
hear a particular song, but they're never going to buy on just
the music. Gen Xers are the children of divorce, the latchkey
kids. They checked their Halloween candy for razor blades and
grew up in a world where sex could kill you. They learned the
hard way to be practical and pragmatic, and because they were
raised in front of the TV, they know more marketing tricks than
Madison Avenue. 

B2: How does this contrast with baby boomers? 
Fishman: Boomers are easy to understand. They never left the
'60s, and never will. So using a piece of music that would remind
them of their youth is a smart marketing move. Nostalgia is
always going to create interest with them. But boomers are kind
of caught in a bind. They love to spend, so it's going to be very
hard to break them of that -- that's good for Detroit. But the
stock market has semi-crashed, they haven't saved enough, and
they're now realizing that they'll be forced to work longer.

B2: So what do these generational differences mean for the
future?
Fishman: Since World War II, baby boomers have been running the
show. But a major generational shift of power is coming to the
U.S. marketplace that will affect values, attitudes, and
lifestyles. It's happening now as we speak. As we make this
transition into Generation X: If you don't understand Gen X, you
don't get your customer. You're not going to be here in 5 or 10
years.  


* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Make Your Sales, Marketing and Support Teams Instantly Successful
FREE Test Drive ? Register Here!  Sign Up for a Test Drive
Receive A Free whitepaper *How to Select a Sales Force that
Sells.*  Salesforce.com. Success. Not Software. Register Here
http://www.salesforce.com/us/orderEntry/partner.jsp?promocode=team-edition_5Rh
http://ar.atwola.com/redir/B0/EjS6oVhoIQ0VvyaLF9XHDpX-b5K0pmDgESzJWvfzu8VZYHx51UMdhA$$/http://www.salesforce.com/us/orderEntry/partner.jsp?promocode=team-edition_5Rh
* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Related Articles:

-- It's an Ad! It's a Game! It's ... Both!
http://www.business2.com/articles/mag/0,,37731,00.html

-- For Sale: Moby (And Every Other Hip Recording Artist on the
Planet)
http://www.business2.com/articles/mag/0,,35037,00.html

-- Marketing With a New Beat
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,17633,00.html

 
Recommended Links:

-- Ford Motor Company (F)
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,69912,00.html

-- Music Industry: News
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,2352,00.html

-- Automotive Industry
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,105,00.html

 
Today's Top Stories:

-- The Selling of Breast Cancer
http://www.business2.com/articles/mag/0,,46296,00.html

-- What eBay Isn't Telling You
http://www.business2.com/articles/mag/0,,42194,00.html

-- On-Demand Computing Scores Its First Customer
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46391,00.html

 
Recent Marketing Focus Articles:

-- Tidbits From the Marketing Front - Dec 23
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46148,00.html

-- United: Marketing From the Edge - Dec 12
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,45921,00.html

-- The Gap Tries On Discounts  - Dec 05
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,45800,00.html

-- Read More Marketing Focus Articles
http://www.business2.com/columns/0,,3219,00.html


++++++++++

Please do not reply to this message.

If you have any questions, comments, or would like to send
feedback to the author, send an e-mail to:
marketing_focus@business2.com

You are receiving the TEXT version of this newsletter.  To get
the HTML version with formatting and graphics, just go to:
http://www.business2.com/nl/html?EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com 

To unsubscribe from this newsletter, go to:
http://www.business2.com/newsletter/unsubscribe?id=36&EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com

To manage your existing newsletter subscriptions or subscribe to
other Business 2.0 newsletters, go to:
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/newslettersub/1,,manage,FF.html?EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com

