Received: (qmail 11409 invoked from network); 8 Jan 2003 06:34:54 -0000
Received: from dev214.mailshell.com (HELO mailshell.com) (71.129.195.163)
  by dev50.mailshell.com with SMTP; 8 Jan 2003 06:34:54 -0000
Received: (qmail 15116 invoked by uid 99); 8 Jan 2003 06:34:54 -0000
Received: (qmail 1016 invoked from network); 8 Jan 2003 06:34:53 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO out001.tep1.com) (66.180.245.21)
  by www.mailshell.com with SMTP; 8 Jan 2003 06:34:53 -0000
To: "Mailshell User" <nospam@mailshell.com>
From: Macworld Weekly <macworld_weekly@macworld.email-publisher.com>
Subject: Macworld Weekly [01.07.03 -- 01.13.03]
Date: Tue, 07 Jan 2003 21:00:00 -0700
Message-ID: <1894774074-1463747838-1042006980@topica.com>
X-Topica-Id: <1042005610.svc004.24851.1001534>
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain

------------------------- 
MACWORLD WEEKLY NEWSLETTER 
01.07.03 - 01.13.03 
Macworld - The Mac Product Experts
-------------------------

---------------------------------------------------

============================================================

Introducing NoteTaker(TM) 2003  

Use it everyday for everything that's on your mind.

Discover the powerful new software application for OS X that lets
you use your information, your data, your notes, your ideas ...
your way. NoteTaker 2003 uniquely combines outline processing,
multi-media content, dynamic Services, web page viewing with a
visually rich "spiral notebook with tab sections" user interface
for organizing and indexing information on-demand.

Go to http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeVWbV6jKRb/ and download the free demo today.


============================================================

---------------------------------------------------

EDITOR'S NOTE 
---------------------------------------------------

Yes, the newsletter is delayed by a day, but when given a choice
between a pre-Expo newsletter and one weighing in on all the
latest news, we figured you'd prefer an Expo take. Let us know
what you think at: newsletters@macworld.com.



KEYNOTE WINNERS AND LOSERS
--------------------------------------------------- 
By Philip Michaels, Senior Editor, Macworld (pmichaels@macworld.com)

Steve Jobs kicked off the biannual Macworld Expo Tuesday morning
with a two-hour parade of products, progress, and promise. He
unveiled an eye-catching widescreen PowerBook, and, after
eliciting an appropriate amount of oohs and aahs, pulled back the
curtain on a snazzy compact version of the laptop for an
ooh-and-aah encore. He announced some impressive-looking updates
to Apple's well-regarded iApps that will have the programs
working together like an a cappella jazz quartet. And, at a time
when other industry players are making like ChickenLittleCo. and
waiting for the sky to stop falling, Jobs established Apple as a
leader, not some sort of timorous me-tooer. "What's driving us is
one simple thing," Jobs said at the conclusion of his speech.
"Innovation."

Not to dwell on the past, but comparing and contrasting Tuesday's
keynote to the one Jobs gave six months ago at Macworld Expo New
York would be like stacking up the bright, warm weather that
greeted Expo attendees this week against the overcast and gloom
one normally associates with winter 'round these parts.

Maybe that was why Mac users appeared to be heading into this
week's Expo with low expectations for whatever announcements Jobs
had in store. So what happens amid all this burgeoning sturm und
drang? Oh ... nothing much. Steve Jobs just comes out and
promises two Macworld Expos' worth of announcements, the crowd
goes wild, and everyone leaves the keynote excited about what's
ahead for the Mac platform in the coming months.

Read a full version of this article detailing the winners and
losers from Tuesday's keynote at:

http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeVXbV6jKRb/


MAC 911 WEEKLY
--------------------------------------------------- 
By Christopher Breen, Contributing Editor, Macworld (mac911@macworld.com)


Q. I am an AOL subscriber who's having problems viewing certain
websites with AOL's browser. I'm running a Power Mac 7200 and
Performa 6290 using AOL version 5.0 under Mac OS 8.1. Is there
anything I can do to make AOL more compatible with the Web?

-- Bruce Lucier

A. Yes -- don't use AOL's browser. Many AOL subscribers are
unaware that once you're connected to AOL you can use any browser
you like. Just log onto the service, fire up your browser, and
surf to your heart's content (or, at least, until AOL
automatically cuts you off for a perceived lack of activity).

What makes your situation a bit stickier is that your hardware
and operating system are considered geriatric by today's
standards and won't support modern browsers. Thankfully, Netscape
offers an archive of all of its browsers since version 2.02 at
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeVYbV6jKRb/ Download an older
version -- version 4.6, for example -- launch AOL, and then
launch this older version of Netscape. You should have a far
better browsing experience than you had with AOL's limited
browser.

TIP: EdList

The big boys and girls of digital video have the capability to
generate edit lists of their video projects -- lists that detail
when such events as clips, transitions, and sound effects take
place during the course of the project. Thanks to Andy Baird you
can now generate an edit list for iMovie. Baird's SuperCard
4-based EdList creates a readable-by-mere-mortals edit list from
any iMovie project file. It's free, works with both Mac OS 9 and
Mac OS X, and can be downloaded from
www.andybaird.com/software/edlist.

UPDATE

In last week's newsletter, I stated that you could hide all
background applications by holding Option and clicking on the
Finder icon in the Dock. This is incorrect. Holding down Option
and clicking on this icon hides only the previous application. To
hide all applications you must hold down Command and Option and
click the Finder icon in the Dock.

I also mentioned that you might try open-source drivers for
certain Hewlett-Packard printers because of an incompatibility
between Mac OS X 10.2.2 and some HP printer models. Since I
originally penned that suggestion, Apple has release Mac OS X
10.2.3, which fixes that incompatibility.

For those who care about such things, the incompatibility was
related to a general USB polling problem -- one where a memory
leak resulted from the HP communications application constantly
polling the USB chain to determine if a camera memory card was
inserted in a Photosmart printer. This problem affected any USB
device that polled the USB chain so can't be pinned strictly on
HP's drivers or hardware.

Apple has shown HP a way to get the same results without polling
the USB chain. Future drivers will use this Apple-recommended
method.


SHAMELESS SELF-PROMOTION

Macworld Expo is here and, with it, comes an opportunity to
convey to my faithful readers where I might be a-wandering during
that week.

Wednesday finds me at the Aladdin booth (#1407) from noon to 1:00
PM discussing all things iPod. On that same day you can find me
in the Users Group Lounge from 3:00 to 4:00 PM.

On Thursday from 12:30 - 1:15 PM I'll be among those
participating in the MacBrainiac  Challenge (hosted by New York
Times columnist David Pogue). My team includes Team Captain Shawn
King of the Your Mac Life radio program and Macworld- and Chicago
Sun Times columnist, Andy Ihnatko. Opposing us are the Houston
Chronicle's Bob LeVitus (Team Captain), Adam "Mr. TidBits" Engst,
and MacFixIt's Ted Landau.

Adam, Bob, and I (along with Macworld contributing editor and Los
Angeles Times columnist Jim Heid) will appear at the Peachpit
Press booth (#2023) from 2:00 - 3:00 PM to discuss (and hawk) or
iApplication books.

Finally, I present the iPod Super Session from 3:00 - 4:15
(session S54).

Hope to see you there!

---------------------------------------------------

============================================================

Whatever your skill level, Macworld Conference & Expo has
something to offer you.

Macworld Conference & Expo, January 6 - 10, 2003 The Moscone
Center, San Francisco, CA

As the world's most comprehensive Macintosh OS event, Macworld
provides introductory, intermediate and advanced education
through its highly-acclaimed conference programs, and its exhibit
floor is the only place where you can evaluate, test drive and
purchase the newest products and coolest technologies.

Check it out: http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeVZbV6jKRb/

============================================================


---------------------------------------------------


NEWS SUMMARY
---------------------------------------------------
by Lisa Schmeiser, Senior Associate Editor, Macworld
(lschmeiser@macworld.com)

All This, and a New Browser Too: Say what you will about the
musical acts at San Francisco's Fillmore Theater -- the best show
in January is often at Moscone Center and it's headlined by Steve
Jobs.  The iCeo started off small by showing off the new Burton
"Amp" jacket, a snowboard/ski jacket that features a pocket for
an iPod and iPod controls in the sleeve; the jacket is only
available online, and it retails for $499. Jobs then moved on to
mention the extension of Microsoft's "Office Party" promotion,
wherein new Mac buyers can purchase Office v.X for US $199 at the
time when they purchase their Mac.

The keynote's focus then shifted to an implementation of the
digital hub strategy Apple announced a few years before. The
company's signature professional video editing software, Final
Cut Pro, now comes in a consumer-friendly edition: Final Cut
Express, targeted toward education and consumer customers at
$299. Final Cut Express has the same interface and workflow as
Final Cut Pro, video editing tools, hundreds of special effects
and easy delivery to DVD, Web, or tape. Jobs also announced a
suite of applications called iLife, which Jobs introduced with,
"We are going to do for digital lifestyle apps what Microsoft did
for office productivity." iLife is composed of iMovie 3, iTunes
3, iPhoto 2 and iDVD 3, all of which sport improvements that
focus on letting Mac users import and use files between different
iLife apps. Users can download iMovie 3, iTunes 3 and iPhoto 2
for free, or buy all four applications for $49.

Jobs then told the audience to "buckle up," and introduced a new
Web browser, called Safari. The free browser -- which only works
on Macs running Jaguar -- features a streamlined inteface, a
Google search function embedded in the toolbar, a drop-and-drag
favorites bar, a bookmark file which uses the same organizational
metaphor as iTunes and iPhoto (window panes where you can see
folder hierarchy and individual folder items) and a handy
SnapBack button, which automatically returns individuals to the
top-level page of the Web site they were drilling into. Like
iMovie 3, iTunes 3 and iPhoto 2, Safari is available for download
on the Apple Web site. Jobs then introduced Keynote, an
application devoted to presentations. Keynote includes
professionally designed themes, typography, pro-quality image
resizing, animated charts and tables that can be created in
seconds, and cinematic-quality transitions, according to Jobs.
Available immediately for US$99, Keynote imports and exports
PowerPoint, QuickTime, and PDF files.

Before the attendees filed out to get their free copies of
Keynote, there was one more thing -- or, in this case, two more
things: the smallest and largest PowerBooks ever. On the small
end of the scale is a PowerBook with a 12" screen, measuring a
little over one inch thick and weighing in at 4.6 pounds.  It
comes with a 867 MHz PowerPC G4 processor, a standard
slot-loading Combo (DVD-ROM/CD-RW) optical drive, and built-in
Bluetooth. At the opposite end, the 17" PowerBook boasts a screen
derived from the 17" flat-panel iMac, displaying 1440-by-900
pixels in a widescreen 16:10 aspect ratio. Although the machine's
stats are impressive -- a 1 GHz PowerPC G4 processor, new
high-speed architecture, Nvidia graphics, and a slot-loading
SuperDrive for playing and burning CDs and DVDs-- two other
things make it a standout. The first is the keyboard, which
automatically illuminates or dims depending on light levels. The
second is the degree of network connectivity: the 17" PowerBook
includes two powered FireWire ports, one FireWire 400 port, and
one FireWire 800 port. And, it continues to be the only notebook
to offer built-in Gigabit Ethernet (10/100/1000BASE-T); in
addition, it comes with both AirPort Extreme and Bluetooth
wireless networking built in. And what is AirPort Extreme? It's
Apple's new wireless networking technology implementation, based
on the 802.11g standard of 54 mb/second and available via AirPort
Extreme base station (retailing at $a $199 "Broadband Edition"
designed to support cable modems, DSL lines, and other similar
connections, and a $249 Modem + Broadband Edition, which adds a
56K V.90 modem if you're still using dial-up), the 17" PowerBook,
or the 12" PowerBook provided that smaller machine has an AirPort
Extreme card, available for US$99. As for pricing on PowerBooks
large and small, the 17" PowerBook starts at US $3,299 and the
12" one at $1799.

That's not the only news to come out of Expo. 
To get frequent updates on which vendors
have introduced what products and upgrades, keep checking
MacCentral (http://maccentral.macworld.com/) throughout Expo
Week.


MWSF: Details emerge on Burton 'Amp' jacket
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV1bV6jKRb/

Microsoft announces Mac 'trifecta'
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV2bV6jKRb/

Final Cut Express: pro-style video editing on a budget
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV3bV6jKRb/

Apple's iLife suite integrates digital hub apps
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV4bV6jKRb/

Apple unveils Safari Web browser
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV5bV6jKRb/

Keynote: Apple's new presentation application
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV6bV6jKRb/

Jobs unveils biggest, smallest PowerBooks ever
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV7bV6jKRb/

Apple introduces high-speed 'Airport Extreme'
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV8bV6jKRb/

Pictures from Steve Jobs' keynote
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeV9bV6jKRb/
html

Macworld Expo keynote coverage -- Live
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWabV6jKRb/


We were so young and innocent then: Prior to the keynote, many
Mac users were engaging in another time-honored Expo tradition:
speculating on what would be at the keynote. Monday was an
excellent day for rounding up stories which tried to anticipate
the contents of the keynote. News.com reported that Apple was
expected to unveil "a new portable product aimed at bolstering
the company's strategy to make itself into a major player in home
entertainment" but conceded that the product in question remained
"shrouded in mystery." Although the story did use past
information -- Apple's stated support of 802.11g -- to correctly
conclude that whatever hardware debuted would support both this
standard and BlueTooth, it also reported, "one thing that is not
expected at the show are new computers." The New York Times also
engaged in some pre-show speculation courtesy of United States
patent application no. 20030002246, concluding, "it seems that
the quirky computer maker is considering the manufacture of a
machine that acts something like a mood ring  a computer whose
shells change colors at the owner's whim."

Apple Banks on Digital Media Harvest (News.com)
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWbbV6jKRb/

Apple May Plan Computer Chameleon to Reflect Owners' Whims (New
York Times)
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWcbV6jKRb/


THE WEEK on MACWORLD.COM
---------------------------------------------------

As other tech industry trade shows see attendance slump or
disappear from the scene entirely, the U.S.-based Macworld Expo
conferences forge on.

http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWdbV6jKRb/


and the quote of the week:

"It is clearly designed as a desktop replacement. This is an
executive portable, not backpack ballast. But carried from room
to room in a professional setting, it could very well become a
workhorse for workplaces."

-- Newstetter, on which niche the 17" PowerBook will fill, at:
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWebV6jKRb/
=UBB4&Number=102492&page=0&view=collapsed&sb=5&o=14&fpart=all

---------------------------------------------------

============================================================

Your Mac Life

Tune in to hear the difference! Get the latest Mac news,
interviews, fun, and information every Wednesday evening LIVE!
It's Your Mac Life, the internet radio show hosted by Shawn King.
Be part of our interactive audience.

Check it out today at: http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWfbV6jKRb/

============================================================

---------------------------------------------------


ABOUT this NEWSLETTER
---------------------------------------------------

The Macworld Weekly Newsletter is your email source for the
latest Mac information from Macworld and MacCentral. For help
with your subscription, visit our newsletters Web page at
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWgbV6jKRb/
If you have comments or questions, please contact us at
mailto:newsletters@macworld.com.

Subscribe to Macworld
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWhbV6jKRb/

Subscription Help
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWibV6jKRb/

Gift Subscriptions
http://click.macworld.email-publisher.com/maaaLomaaVeWjbV6jKRb/

To unsubscribe from this mailing, please click here:
http://macworld.email-publisher.com/u/?bUrHyf.bV6jKR.YXJjaDYw

