Received: (qmail 4905 invoked from network); 8 Jan 2003 00:21:59 -0000
Received: from dev214.mailshell.com (HELO mailshell.com) (71.129.195.163)
  by dev50.mailshell.com with SMTP; 8 Jan 2003 00:21:59 -0000
Received: (qmail 1576 invoked by uid 99); 8 Jan 2003 00:21:58 -0000
Received: (qmail 11265 invoked from network); 8 Jan 2003 00:21:57 -0000
Received: from unknown (HELO apollo.business2.com) (64.12.49.184)
  by www.mailshell.com with SMTP; 8 Jan 2003 00:21:57 -0000
Received: from apollo (apollo [64.12.49.184])
	by apollo.business2.com (8.12.4/8.12.4) with SMTP id h0806Ov6023965
	for nospam@mailshell.com; Tue, 7 Jan 2003 19:08:23 -0500 (EST)
To: "Mailshell User" <nospam@mailshell.com>
Message-ID: <10419845036460.1044676761115022.BulkMailer@business2.com>
Date: Tue, 7 Jan 2003 19:06:17 -0500 (EST)
From: "Business 2.0 - Future Boy" <newsletters@business2.com>
Subject: My Wish List for 2003
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain;charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Make Your Sales, Marketing and Support Teams Instantly Successful
FREE Test Drive ? Register Here!  Sign Up for a Test Drive
Receive A Free whitepaper *How to Select a Sales Force that
Sells.*  Salesforce.com. Success. Not Software. Register Here
http://www.salesforce.com/us/orderEntry/partner.jsp?promocode=team-edition_5Rh
http://ar.atwola.com/redir/B0/devh-YzmRxdDYS88UatDwkAP0eayiMb7vK1g1Frb6OFHeQp_pFiAuA$$/http://www.salesforce.com/us/orderEntry/partner.jsp?promocode=team-edition_5Rh
* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *

FUTURE BOY

My Wish List for 2003
By Erick Schonfeld

http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46308,00.html

Now that we're all back from the holidays, it's time to start
thinking about 2003 -- and what we might expect during the coming
12 months. For me, that means thinking about what technology may
bring. I don't claim to have any crystal ball, so these aren't
predictions, just a wish list for the year ahead. Here's what I'd
like to see:

1. Verizon will finally figure out how to hook up my DSL. The
best thing that could happen to me technologically this year
would be for Verizon to actually deliver the DSL service I
ordered last November. Without getting into the painful details,
let's just say that my activation date has already been postponed
twice, even though the prior occupants of my apartment had DSL
(so it really shouldn't be that difficult, right?). It would be
nice if companies would refrain from advertising a service unless
they could actually deliver it the same year in which it was
ordered. That's especially true if it's something they're asking
consumers to spend $50 a month on. Which brings me to my second
wish ... 

2. Broadband prices will drop to $20 a month. Maybe that's an
unrealistic goal -- I'd settle for $30 a month. After all, this
is the year broadband is finally supposed to go mainstream, but
that won't happen until the technology is available at mainstream
prices. The price is bound to come down over time, as the market
grows and companies compete to gain more share. In a perfect
world, that would start happening this year, and people would
start thinking of high-speed Internet access as a basic service,
something akin to cable TV. Any broadband provider that wants to
continue to charge a premium will have to learn the HBO lesson
and offer something extra that's at least as good as The
Sopranos.

3. A digital music service will launch that can rock my world.
One premium option those broadband providers can offer is a
digital music service that brings the same endless selection as
illicit file-sharing communities like Kazaa, only with faster and
more reliable downloads. They could also add an array of
independent reviews and other resources to help people find new
music. I would be willing to pay for such a service. (None of the
current for-pay music services really cuts it, in my opinion.) I
would have to be able to transfer any downloaded music from my
laptop to an MP3 player or other device. Better yet, I'd like to
have access to my playlist from anywhere I can log on to the
Internet -- even from my phone. There's an idea for Verizon:
Justify that $50 fee by bundling in an awesome music service, and
then make extra money on top by offering broadband customers an
MP3-capable wireless phone that works on its new third-generation
(3G) network. Verizon could give the music away for free and make
money on the airtime (although the phone would have to include a
significant amount of local storage and the ability to download
from a PC).

4. Mobile-phone e-mail will become a reality. The one thing that
would make me truly happy is the ability to access my e-mail via
my cell phone. Although this has been technically feasible for a
while now -- many cell phones allow you to forward your e-mail
from either an Internet or corporate account -- apparently it's
too complicated for most tech departments at major corporations
to bother with. The newer PDA/phone combos are best for reading
e-mail, but even a 2-inch screen is sufficient for scanning
subject lines. This isn't a technology problem; the IT guys out
there just need to make it a priority.

5. Wi-Fi mania will sweep the nation (or at least my
neighborhood). Of course, if there were more wireless broadband
(Wi-Fi) hotspots in place throughout the country, then I wouldn't
have to rely on nascent 3G cellular networks for my (somewhat
pathetic) need to always feel connected. Last year saw the Wi-Fi
craze sprout, and this year promises a fuller flowering. I guess
if Verizon doesn't come through on the DSL for my apartment, I
can set up a Pringles-can antenna on my roof to try to pick up a
Wi-Fi signal from one of my more fortunate, broadband-linked
neighbors -- or maybe even from the Starbucks down the street.

6. Robots will clean up my life. Since I spend so much time on
the Web, other things I used to do on a regular basis seem to
have fallen by the wayside. Like vacuuming and dusting. That's
why my heart gladdened this past holiday season to see ads for
the new automated vacuum [http://www.roombavac.com/index.htm]
from iRobot. This disk on wheels is a little robot that scoots
about your apartment guided by its own sensors, sucking up all
the dust and dirt in its path, all for only $200. I can't vouch
for how well it works -- I haven't seen one in action yet -- but
my sincerest hope is that this is only the beginning. I could
also use a full-feature Jetsons-style maid, a bartender/butler,
and maybe some worker bots to help me build a roof deck in the
spring.

7. Cloning claims will become more commonplace. Perfecting
machines to act more human may turn out to be an unnecessarily
tedious task. Wouldn't it just be easier to create clones of our
best workers? Whether the Raelian sect's recent claims that it is
successfully cloning people
[http://www.cnn.com/2003/HEALTH/01/05/human.cloning/index.html]
turn out to be true or just a hoax, the possibility of human
cloning is becoming less theoretical every week. Of course, there
is the issue of raising, feeding, and training the clones to do
the work you want them to do (and the fact that, even as clones,
they still have the same legal rights you and I do). Then there
are all of those messy ethical issues to worry about -- like
whether it's really a good idea to try to create a subservient
race of genetically selected clones (or a superior race of
genetically superior ones, for that matter). On second thought,
maybe it's better to just stick with the robots after all. 

8. And, oh yeah, world peace would be nice too.  


* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *
Make Your Sales, Marketing and Support Teams Instantly Successful
FREE Test Drive ? Register Here!  Sign Up for a Test Drive
Receive A Free whitepaper *How to Select a Sales Force that
Sells.*  Salesforce.com. Success. Not Software. Register Here
http://www.salesforce.com/us/orderEntry/partner.jsp?promocode=team-edition_5Rh
http://ar.atwola.com/redir/B0/devh-YzmRxdDYS88UatDwkAP0eayiMb7vK1g1Frb6OFHeQp_pFiAuA$$/http://www.salesforce.com/us/orderEntry/partner.jsp?promocode=team-edition_5Rh
* * * * * * * * * * * * * ADVERTISEMENT * * * * * * * * * * * * *

Related Articles:

-- Bringing Web Speed to the Sticks
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46077,00.html

-- The Heavyweights Bless Wi-Fi 
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46063,00.html

-- Music to Fans' Ears
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,45418,00.html

-- Verizon Aids NorthPoint
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,15654,00.html

 
Recommended Links:

-- DSL Service Providers
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,4234,00.html

-- Internet Broadband Access
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,3692,00.html

-- IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi)
http://www.business2.com/webguide/0,,14915,00.html

 
Today's Top Stories:

-- For Tech, Bush's Plan Is No Help 
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46302,00.html

-- Inada Chair H.9: Turbocharged Magic Fingers
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46283,00.html

-- Microsoft Takes the Battle From the Desktop to the PDA 
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46276,00.html

 
Recent Future Boy Articles:

-- Can Dell Do to Printers What It's Done to PCs? - Dec 20
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,46129,00.html

-- Peer-to-Peer Technology Goes Legit - Nov 22
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,45509,00.html

-- Fighting Microsoft the Open-Source Way - Nov 08
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/0,,45073,00.html

-- Read More Future Boy Articles
http://www.business2.com/columns/0,,1510,00.html


++++++++++

Please do not reply to this message.

If you have any questions, comments, or would like to send
feedback to the author, send an e-mail to:
future_boy@business2.com

You are receiving the TEXT version of this newsletter.  To get
the HTML version with links and graphics, just go to:
http://www.business2.com/nl/html?EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com 

To unsubscribe from this newsletter, go to:
http://www.business2.com/newsletter/unsubscribe?id=8&EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com

To manage your existing newsletter subscriptions or subscribe to
other Business 2.0 newsletters, go to:
http://www.business2.com/articles/web/newslettersub/1,,manage,FF.html?EmailAddr=nospam@mailshell.com

